ML-DSA-65 Post-Quantum Transaction Signatures (#645)
near/NEPs: neps/nep-0645.md

---
NEP: 645
Title: Post-Quantum Transaction Signatures (ML-DSA-65)
Authors: Adam Wierzbicki
Status: Draft
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/645
Type: Protocol
Version: 1.0.0
Created: 2026-06-29
LastUpdated: 2026-06-29
---

## Summary

> This proposal adds a third transaction-signature scheme to NEAR: FIPS 204 **ML-DSA-65**, a post-quantum digital signature algorithm standardized by NIST. It is offered alongside the existing `ed25519` and `secp256k1` schemes, which are NOT deprecated. After the `PostQuantumSignatures` protocol feature activates (stabilized at protocol version 85, shipped in the neard 2.13 release), an account may add an ML-DSA-65 access key and sign transactions, `DelegateAction`s, and `AddKey`/`DeleteKey` actions with it.

Reviewer: Please link the NIST ML-DSA-65 standard.
Also secp256k1 is not a scheme it is a curve. You want to say ECDSA over secp256k1.
Add the word currently in "which are *currently* NOT deprecated"

Reviewer: I strongly recommend you call the feature MLDSA65 simply because we might in the future have more/different PQ signature schemes. Not sure if it's good to have a very generic term for one specific scheme

Author: The protocol feature is already stabilized, so it's too late to rename it, but I can change the title and phrasing of this NEP.

Reviewer: Would you be so kind and open an issue for the renaming of the protocol?

Author: I can do that.

The scope of this first milestone is deliberately narrow: **transaction signing and access keys only**. Validator keys, block/chunk signatures, on-chain verification host functions, and implicit-account derivation are out of scope and remain unchanged.

> To keep the cost of the large ML-DSA-65 public key (1952 bytes) from inflating state, access keys are stored on-trie by a 32-byte SHA3-256 hash of the public key rather than the full key. The full public key travels on the wire in the transaction, where it is needed for verification. The extra verification work ML-DSA-65 imposes on the network is priced as additional gas burnt at transaction conversion, so signers of post-quantum transactions pay for the cost they add while users of the classical schemes are unaffected.

Reviewer: The first sentence could be split into two for more simplicity.

In the last sentence I would say  "so signers of post-quantum transactions pay an extra-cost while ..." instead of the long sentence

## Motivation

> NEAR's two existing signature schemes, `ed25519` (Edwards-curve) and `secp256k1` (used by ETH-style accounts), both rely on the hardness of the elliptic-curve discrete-logarithm problem. A sufficiently large quantum computer running Shor's algorithm would break that assumption and let an attacker recover a private key from the public key. Because every NEAR access key is public on-chain, this is a "store now, forge later" threat: an adversary can record public keys today and forge signatures for them once a cryptographically-relevant quantum computer (CRQC) exists.

Reviewer: Again secp256k1 is a curve not a scheme see above

Reviewer: The store now forge later attack here is a bit weird. Usually this is not a problem. The moment the signer changes signatures to PQ the verifier is supposed to use the new public key, so I do not see any issue in the Quantum adversary being able to forge signatures for a previous public key.

The issue we are protecting from is not the "store now, forge later" (the original sentence is "store now decrypt later" which applies to encryption schemes not signing schemes), it is the not moving at all to post quantum schemes allow a quantum adversary to actually break the current signing mechanism by forging signatures that will be validated by the verifiers

Author: > Again secp256k1 is a curve not a scheme see above

Reframed to "ECDSA over secp256k1".

> The store now forge later attack here is a bit weird.

Removed, simply stating possible signature forgery.

> There is no CRQC today, and it is unclear when one will arrive. The point of this proposal is to give users a migration path *before* that happens. The concrete goal is to **safeguard existing accounts**: a user who is concerned about the quantum threat can add an ML-DSA-65 access key to their account now and immediately gain a key that is not vulnerable to Shor's algorithm. This requires no change to how accounts are created and no migration of existing state.

Reviewer: I do not know what CRQC is? Please explain

Reviewer: Instead of saying "can add" say "should migrate"

Reviewer: You do not need to reiterate over the fact that a PQ key is resistant against quantum attacks. You said it before.

Author: > I do not know what CRQC is? Please explain

It stands for "cryptographically-relevant quantum computer" (see paragraph above). It's a theoretical concept describing a quantum computer capable of breaking classical cryptography.
https://postquantum.com/post-quantum/crqc/

Reviewer: Did not know this abbrev. Sorry for missing it on the par above

> ML-DSA-65 (formerly CRYSTALS-Dilithium) is the medium-strength variant of [FIPS 204], the NIST post-quantum signature standard published in 2024. It is a lattice-based scheme whose security does not depend on the discrete-logarithm or factoring problems. Adding it as a third scheme, rather than replacing the classical ones, lets the network adopt post-quantum signatures incrementally without a flag day and without breaking any existing key, tool, or wallet.

Reviewer: medium-strength is a bit hand-wavy but probably understandable by the public

Reviewer: You can avoid half of this paragraph by adding the word lattice based in the intro (1st paragraph) and the year 2024

This is the first milestone of a larger post-quantum roadmap. Implicit-account derivation, validator keys, and on-chain verification host functions are intended follow-ups (see [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)); none of them is required to deliver the core benefit of protecting existing accounts, so they are deferred.

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

### Overview

> A single protocol feature, `ProtocolFeature::PostQuantumSignatures`, gates the whole change. Once it is active:

Reviewer: What are the other ProtocolFeatures? If they are secp256k1 and ed25519 then I am not a big fan of having this feature called   PostQuantumSignatures, instead I would call it MLDSA65

Author: There are no protocol features for secp256k1 and ed25519. These signature types predate the protocol feature mechanism. I agree that `PostQuantumSignatures` might not be the best feature name, but given that it's already stabilized and included in 2.13 release, I wouldn't change it.

- A transaction MAY be signed by an ML-DSA-65 key.
- An `AddKey` action MAY register an ML-DSA-65 public key as an access key (full-access or function-call).
- A `DelegateAction` (meta-transaction) MAY carry an ML-DSA-65 inner signer.

> - `DeleteKey` and other key-referencing actions accept ML-DSA-65 keys.

Reviewer: Why do you use the term MAY above but not here?

Author: Fixed.

Before the feature is active, any attempt to use an ML-DSA-65 key in these positions is rejected at validation time, so no ML-DSA-65 value can ever enter state on a pre-feature protocol version.

### Scope

**In scope (this NEP):**

- ML-DSA-65 as a transaction signer.

> - ML-DSA-65 access keys (full-access and function-call), stored on-trie by hash.

Reviewer 2: Seems worth mentioning that gas keys can also use the new PQ key format.

- ML-DSA-65 inner signers inside `DelegateAction` meta-transactions.
- Gas pricing for the additional verification cost.
- Transaction-size accounting that includes the large signature.
- Rosetta-RPC and view-RPC representation of the new key/signature type.

**Out of scope (unchanged by this NEP):**

- **Validator / staking keys.** Staking remains `ed25519`-only; `is_valid_staking_key` returns false for ML-DSA-65.
- **Block and chunk signatures.** Consensus signing is unchanged.
- **On-chain verification host functions.** No `ml_dsa_verify` host function is added; contracts that verify signatures continue to use the existing `ed25519_verify` / `p256_verify` / `ecrecover` host functions.
- **Implicit-account derivation.** Neither NEAR-style nor ETH-style implicit accounts gain an ML-DSA-65 form. This is a separate research item (see [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)).
- **Cross-network mirroring** (`tools/mirror`, `tools/fork-network`). These tools cannot yet map ML-DSA-65 keys across networks.

### ML-DSA-65 parameters and library

> ML-DSA-65 is the middle of the three FIPS 204 variants (44 / 65 / 87). It targets **NIST Security Category 3** (comparable to a brute-force key search on AES-192; a Grover-style quantum search gives only a quadratic speedup and remains far out of practical reach).

Reviewer: Instead of the parenthesis say how many bits of security it provides and link the paragraph

> | Quantity | Size |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Cryptographic Material | Size |
```

`PublicKey::MLDSA65` is the only form that appears on the wire (in transactions and actions) and the only form against which a signature can be verified. It is never written into the trie.

### On-trie storage: `PublicKeyHandle` and hashing

Storing a 1952-byte public key for every access key would be prohibitively expensive in state. Instead, ML-DSA-65 access keys are stored **by hash**. To make "a full key on the wire" and "a hashed key in the trie" distinct at the type level, the on-trie identifier lives in a separate enum, `PublicKeyHandle`, used by the trie-key layer and view-API responses:

| `PublicKeyHandle` variant | Borsh tag | Content |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `ED25519` | 0 | 32-byte raw key (byte-identical to `PublicKey::ED25519`) |
| `SECP256K1` | 1 | 64-byte raw key (byte-identical to `PublicKey::SECP256K1`) |

> | `MlDsa65` | 3 | 32-byte SHA3-256 digest of the public key |

Reviewer: Why is the previous all caps but MlDsa65 not all caps?

Author: Fixed.

The two enums use deliberately disjoint borsh tag spaces. `PublicKey` owns `{0, 1, 2}`; `PublicKeyHandle` owns `{0, 1, 3}`. Tag 2 (the full ML-DSA-65 key) is rejected by `PublicKeyHandle` decoding, and tag 3 (the hash) never appears on the wire. As a result, "a full ML-DSA-65 key in the trie" and "an ML-DSA-65 hash in a transaction" are both unrepresentable.

The hash is domain-separated. The on-trie identifier of an ML-DSA-65 public key is:

```

> SHA3-256( b"near:ml-dsa-65-pubkey-hash:v1" || raw_public_key )

Reviewer: nice for the domain separation

1. **Transaction validation** -- `Transaction::check_valid_for_config`. A transaction that uses ML-DSA-65 before the feature is active is rejected with `InvalidTxError::InvalidTransactionVersion`.
2. **Action validation** -- `validate_actions_with_mode`, which also covers actions emitted by contracts as receipts. Rejection here is `ActionsValidationError::UnsupportedProtocolFeature { protocol_feature: "PostQuantumSignatures", version }`.

Borsh **deserialization** of `PublicKey::MLDSA65` and `Signature::MLDSA65` is intentionally NOT gated: once a value can exist in state or history, it must always parse. The action-validation gates are what guarantee that no ML-DSA-65 value enters state on a pre-feature protocol version. A useful consequence: when the feature activates, no ML-DSA-65 access key exists in state yet, so the runtime never has to reconcile a mixed population of pre-gate and post-gate keys. Every ML-DSA-65 key in state was added under the new rules, and **migration is zero**.

### Verification gas pricing

> ML-DSA-65 verification is more expensive than the classical schemes. Benchmarks on an Intel Core Ultra 9 185H (single core) measured mean verify times of roughly 32 µs (ed25519), 24 µs (secp256k1), and 79 µs (ML-DSA-65), with the ML-DSA-65 p99.9 around 170 µs and a worst observed single-sample around 1.3 ms.

Reviewer: what is p99.9?

Author: It means 99.9% of runs executed under 170 µs.

Reviewer: Is it a terminology common for engineers?

This extra cost is charged as **gas** at transaction conversion, through a new runtime parameter:

- `ml_dsa_65_verification_cost = 100_000_000_000` (100 Ggas), introduced at protocol version 85.

> - It is wired through `RuntimeFeesConfig::signature_verification_costs`, an `EnumMap<SignatureKind, ParameterCost>` over `SignatureKind { Ed25519, Secp256k1, MlDsa65 }`. Only `MlDsa65` is non-zero; `Ed25519` and `Secp256k1` are zero, so the classical schemes are unaffected and backwards-compatible.

Reviewer: Why here it's MlDsa65 not MLDSA65

Author: That's a code name. I believe we have a convention of not capitalizing all characters in acronyms, only the first one, when it's a part of a camel-case name.

> The charge is added to the transaction's **burnt** gas (once per ML-DSA-65 signature, including each `DelegateAction`'s inner signer) inside `calculate_tx_cost`. Because it is burnt at conversion, it raises only what the signer must pay to buy the transaction; it does NOT reduce the gas available to the resulting receipts, and it has no effect on cross-contract calls made from within a contract. Under NEAR's `1 Tgas ~= 1 ms` gas-to-time convention, 100 Ggas budgets about 100 µs, which is roughly twice the measured mean verification-time difference over the classical schemes (about 50 µs). It is an additive surcharge levied per signature, not a replacement of the existing per-transaction cost, and the number of signatures in one transaction is bounded (one outer signer plus at most `max_actions_per_receipt` inner `DelegateAction` signers), so the aggregate charge per transaction is bounded.

Reviewer 2: nit: DelegateAction can only carry at most 1 inner action (see `ActionsValidationError::DelegateActionMustBeOnlyOne`)

#### Verification time is not signature-dependent

> ML-DSA signing uses rejection sampling, which raised an initial concern that verification time might depend on signature content and could be inflated by a maliciously crafted signature. This was investigated and **disproven** by benchmark: verifying the same fixed signature repeatedly produces the same time distribution as verifying many different signatures, and verify time is flat across signature hint-weights. The observed variance (a p99.9 around 170 µs and occasional sub-millisecond outliers) is operating-system scheduling noise, not signature content, and it appears for the classical schemes too. No maliciously-crafted signature can blow up verification time, so there is no signature-controllable worst case for the gas charge to price beyond the mean cost difference it already covers.

Reviewer: Please delete this entire paragraph.

Rejection sampling happens at signing end not at the verification: when signing you want to have a generated element meet a specific random distribution. If this element is not "well" picked at signing time then the signature restarts this task. 
Rejection sampling has nothing to do with verification and nothing to do with sending malicious signature to the verifier

Reviewer: It's unfortunate time was wasted on making those benches

Author: Trimmed and reframed.

This accounting fix closes a witness-honesty gap: without it, the witness's transaction-byte bound would systematically undercount ML-DSA-65 transactions by their signature size. *Pricing* the extra wire bytes (a per-byte surcharge on the signature and on the public key carried by `AddKey` / `DeleteKey`) is a separate, deferred question (see [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)); the accounting fix stands on its own.

### View API and RPC representation

- **`view_access_key_list`** returns `ml-dsa-65-hash:<bs58>` for ML-DSA-65 entries, because the trie stores only the hash. The full public key is not recoverable from chain state. Wallets, explorers, and indexers MUST know their own public key (or recompute the handle from it) to reconcile a chain entry with a known key. This is the same model already used for ETH-style implicit accounts, whose on-chain identifier is also a hash.

> - **Rosetta-RPC** gains `CurveType::MlDsa65` and `SignatureType::MlDsa65` (serialized as `"ml_dsa_65"`), with full conversions to and from `KeyType::MLDSA65`. The corresponding upstream addition to the Coinbase Mesh specification is [mesh-specifications#129](https://github.com/coinbase/mesh-specifications/pull/129). Mesh clients that have not picked up the new enum value yet may reject it; this is accepted.

Reviewer: Please MLDSA65 not MlDsa65. It's called Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Standard not like Ed25519 where Ed stands for Edwards.

Author: See my reply here: https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/645#discussion_r3526898400

## Reference Implementation

The feature is implemented in `nearcore` behind `ProtocolFeature::PostQuantumSignatures`, stabilized at **protocol version 85** and included in the **neard 2.13** release.

- [Add FIPS 204 ML-DSA-65 as a third signature scheme](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/15731) (main feature PR).
- [Stabilize ML-DSA-65 signatures at protocol version 85](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/15878).

End-to-end coverage lives in `test-loop-tests/src/tests/ml_dsa_access_key.rs` (full-access and function-call keys) and `ml_dsa_verification_cost.rs` (the burnt-gas charge for an outer transaction and an inner `DelegateAction` signer). For the full set of implementation PRs and a walkthrough of the load-bearing design decisions and code layout, see the in-tree design note `docs/architecture/how/post_quantum_signatures.md`.

## Security Implications

### Quantum resistance and the threat model

> ML-DSA-65 is not vulnerable to Shor's algorithm. Its security rests on the hardness of module lattice problems, at NIST Security Category 3. Adding it lets users protect an account against the "store now, forge later" risk that applies to the classical schemes, where a public key recorded today could be used to forge signatures once a CRQC exists.

Reviewer: Please replace the first sentence with something like: Till this day, MLDSA is resistant against quantum attacks....

Reviewer: BTW this paragraph is super redundant. I would delete it

Author: Trimmed and reframed.

This protection is opt-in and per-key. An account is only quantum-safe to the extent that it relies on ML-DSA-65 keys. Importantly, **validator/staking keys remain `ed25519`-only** under this NEP, so the consensus layer retains classical-only signing. That residual exposure is acknowledged and left to a follow-up (see [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities)).

### Hash strength of the on-trie identifier

> ML-DSA-65 access keys are looked up by a 32-byte (256-bit) SHA3-256 digest of the public key. An attacker who wants to bind a chosen public key to an existing access-key entry needs a second-preimage on the hash; against a Grover-style quantum search this is on the order of 2^128 work. A 256-bit digest is considered secure enough for the access-key lookup, and crucially the full public key is still carried on the wire and verified against, so the hash is an index, not the sole authenticator.

Reviewer: The Grover part is too technical for the public, you can say it is equivalent to roughly 128 bits of security

> The choice of 256 bits has history worth recording. An earlier iteration used SHA3-384, on the argument that matching ML-DSA-65's Category-3 keypair strength against a Grover second-preimage would want a 384-bit digest. The implementation later moved to SHA3-256 (PR [#15830](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/15830)). The decisive practical property is that a 32-byte digest is short enough to be encoded into a NEAR account id, which keeps the door open to deriving ML-DSA-65 implicit accounts from the account id alone in the future. The research review settled on 256-bit as acceptable for this use (and explicitly rejected anything shorter, such as truncation to 160 bits).

Reviewer: Not too sure the argumentation is relevant for the public, but sure

### Variable-time verification

> As described in the Specification, the concern that a maliciously crafted signature could inflate verification time was investigated and disproven: verify time is independent of signature content, and the observed variance is scheduling noise that affects the classical schemes too. Because there is no signature-controllable worst case, a misbehaving signer cannot use verification cost as a denial-of-service vector: the per-signature charge prices the mean cost difference over the classical schemes with headroom, and the number of ML-DSA-65 signatures per transaction is bounded by `max_actions_per_receipt`, so the aggregate verification cost of any single transaction is bounded and paid for.

Reviewer: Your benches does not "study" if a malicious signer provides "malicious" signatures. They check whether the verification is somewhat stable in time. To do the former one you would need to write many many many (arguably infinitely many) different malicious signers computing a signature that is valid but without following the exact MLDSA signing scheme and then benchmark stuff.
This still does not "prove" stable (somewhat constant) time simply because you are benchmarking on a couple signatures not all potential signatures. Instead this "statistically confirms" not "proves"

TLDR: please delete this paragraph.

Author: I've trimmed it significantly and removed the controversial "proves" claim.

### Witness size and DoS

> ML-DSA-65 signatures are about 3.3 KiB, roughly 50x a classical signature, which raises the per-transaction contribution to the `ChunkStateWitness`. The size-accounting change ensures the witness's transaction-byte bound counts the full signature, so a flood of large signatures cannot silently exceed the intended witness size. NEAR does not currently charge gas specifically for witness size for any scheme; the decision here is consistent with that status quo, and the per-byte cost of `AddKey` already imposes a (small) charge for the public-key bytes. Pricing witness bytes more precisely is deferred and tracked as future work.

Reviewer 2: From what I understand the full key will still be carried in receipts `signer_public_key` which can end up in trie buffers and state witness. Seems worth mentioning

### Permanence of the borsh tag assignment

Borsh tag 2 is permanently assigned to `PublicKey::MLDSA65` and `Signature::MLDSA65`, and tag 3 to `PublicKeyHandle::MlDsa65`. Once any block on a network has accepted an ML-DSA-65 transaction or `AddKey`, these decodings are part of that chain's history and cannot be changed.

### Library trust

> The verification path depends on `aws-lc-rs`'s `unstable` ML-DSA APIs. AWS-LC is a widely used and trusted library, and Trail of Bits gave `aws-lc-rs` as their default recommendation for an ML-DSA implementation in Rust, with the caveats that they had not performed a direct audit of it and that a competitive pure-Rust implementation could emerge later. The `unstable` feature means the API surface (not necessarily the cryptography) may change between versions; the crate is pinned to an exact version and a known-answer test guards against silent behavioral changes. Implementations MUST re-benchmark and re-validate on any version bump.

Reviewer 2: - Do we have a reference link for the Trail of Bits recommendaion?
- Given the MUST recommendation for re-benchmarking, I think it is worth adding a clear runbook for updating the version of the `aws-lc-rs` library to the `post_quantum_signatues.md` document in the nearcore repo.

Author: > Do we have a reference link for the Trail of Bits recommendaion?

No, AFAIR it came from private communication.

## Alternatives

### A different ML-DSA library

Several Rust crates implement FIPS 204. `libcrux` (Cryspen) is formally verified but was pre-1.0 and its maintainers note production use requires contacting them. The RustCrypto `ml-dsa` crate is from trusted developers but was likewise pre-1.0 and had a recent vulnerability at evaluation time. `rust-openssl` and `ring` lacked support. `aws-lc-rs` was chosen as the most widely used and trusted option that was usable now, and is the one Trail of Bits recommended. The trade-off is the FFI boundary and the `unstable` API gate.

### Storing the full public key on-trie

The 1952-byte public key could be stored directly, like `ed25519` and `secp256k1` keys. This was rejected: it would raise the storage-staking cost of an ML-DSA-65 full-access key from about 0.0008 NEAR to about 0.02 NEAR (roughly 24x) and bloat state. Since the full key is already carried in the transaction for verification, storing only its hash loses nothing functionally and aligns with how ETH-style implicit accounts already work.

### SHA3-384 instead of SHA3-256

> A 384-bit digest would more conservatively match the keypair's quantum security margin against a second-preimage search. It was rejected in favour of SHA3-256 because 256 bits is judged sufficient for an access-key index (where the full key is still verified on the wire) and because a 32-byte digest fits within a NEAR account id, which a 48-byte digest does not. This keeps a future path to ML-DSA-65 implicit accounts open.

Reviewer: Hasn't this been discussed already above?

Author: It has been indeed. Trimmed this and referenced the above section.

- **Cross-network mirroring.** `tools/mirror` and `tools/fork-network` currently panic or silently skip ML-DSA-65 keys (the full key cannot be recovered from the on-trie hash). A deterministic seed-derived key mapping, analogous to the existing `ed25519`/`secp256k1` mapping, is needed before a post-quantum-bearing chain can be mirrored. The interim behavior should at least be unified to "log and skip" so failures are visible.
- **Wallet / SDK support and a view endpoint.** Update `near-api-js` / `near-cli-rs`, document the hash format, and decide whether to expose a dedicated `view_access_key_hash` endpoint or keep the hashed form in the existing `public_key` field with the new prefix.
- **Pricing the extra wire/witness bytes.** A per-byte gas surcharge for the large signature at conversion, and a per-byte component on `AddKey` / `DeleteKey` for the public-key bytes they carry. The accounting is already in place; only the pricing is deferred.
- **Eventual deprecation of the classical schemes.** Not proposed here. The classical schemes remain first-class; deprecation would be a separate, much later decision once post-quantum adoption is broad.

## Consequences

### Positive

> - Users can protect existing accounts against the quantum "store now, forge later" threat today, with no account migration and no flag day.

Reviewer: Forget the store now, forge later. Just say protects against quantum attacks.

> - The classical schemes are untouched, so every existing key, wallet, tool, and contract keeps working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The classical schemes are untouched which preserves backwards compatibility. Each key, wallet, tool, and contract would still work.
```

- Hash-based storage makes an ML-DSA-65 access key cost the same in storage staking as an `ed25519` key, despite a 1952-byte public key.
- The additional verification cost is paid by the signers who incur it; classical-scheme users pay nothing extra.
- Zero state migration: the validation gates guarantee no ML-DSA-65 value exists in state before activation.

### Neutral

> - ML-DSA-65 transactions are large (a ~3.3 KiB signature plus a ~2 KiB public key on the wire for `AddKey`), reducing how many fit in a chunk and increasing their witness footprint, though within existing limits.

Reviewer: That looks more like a negative to me

- `view_access_key_list` returns a hash, not the public key, for ML-DSA-65 entries. This matches the ETH-implicit-account model but means off-chain tools must know their own key to reconcile.
- The implementation depends on the `unstable` API surface of `aws-lc-rs`, requiring re-benchmarking on version bumps.
- Protocol version 85 also stabilizes unrelated features; the `PostQuantumSignatures` gate is independent of them.

### Negative

> - Verification is slower than the classical schemes (mean roughly 79 µs vs roughly 30 µs), priced as 100 Ggas of additional burnt gas per signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verification is roughly 2.6x slower than the classical schemes (79 µs vs 30 µs), priced as 100 Ggas of additional burnt gas per signature.
```

- The borsh tag assignments (2 for the key/signature, 3 for the handle) are permanent once any chain accepts an ML-DSA-65 value.

> - Post-quantum protection is partial: validator keys, implicit accounts, and on-chain verification remain classical or absent in this milestone.

Reviewer: That's not a negative of this NEP or using MLDSA. It is just that we still did not tackle the other parts

> - Cross-network mirroring of ML-DSA-65-bearing chains is not yet supported.

Reviewer: Not * yet * supporting something is not caused by the integration of MLDSA. I do not thing this is "negative"

Author: Removed.

### Backwards Compatibility

> The change is backwards compatible. Before `PostQuantumSignatures` activates, ML-DSA-65 keys and signatures are rejected by transaction and action validation, so no pre-feature behavior changes and no ML-DSA-65 value can enter state. Borsh decoding of the new variants is always available, which is required so that any value, once written, always parses. The classical schemes' gas, storage, and validation behavior is unchanged (`signature_verification_costs` is zero for them). The transaction-size limit change is version-gated to keep chunk production deterministic across the activation boundary. There is no state migration.

Reviewer 2: Couple points worth mentioning:
- Contracts can also read the current signer via `signer_account_pk`. if these contracts hardcoded a small buffer size, the large size of the public key could be an issue for them. 
- Contracts compiled with older versions of `near-sdk` (eg, before [this](https://github.com/near/near-sdk-rs/blob/5a3bc895c15136f50b02ce30659ae97f6fdfc98e/near-sdk-core/src/types/public_key.rs#L25-L42) was introduced), will not be able to operate with these keys (fail with `UnknownCurve`). Notably, `multisig2` from `core-contracts` is impacted.

Tooling that reads `view_access_key_list` MUST be prepared for the `ml-dsa-65-hash:<bs58>` form, and Rosetta clients SHOULD accept the new `ml_dsa_65` curve and signature types.

## Unresolved Issues

- **Pricing witness/wire size.** Charging for the extra bytes the large signature and public key add is deliberately deferred. The team agreed not to implement it for this milestone; whether and how to track it for a future release was raised and not resolved in the design discussion.
- **External audit.** Whether ML-DSA-65 integration warrants a dedicated external audit beyond the Trail of Bits library recommendation was raised during design and not formally resolved.

> - **Mirror / fork-network behavior** is inconsistent (some paths panic, others silently skip). Unifying this to a visible "log and skip" before any serious mirroring of a post-quantum-bearing chain is an open task.

Reviewer 2: Seems better to resolve this issue soon as well. Maybe the tooling added in `offline_test.py` can be used for checking the PQ keys work with mirror

`PublicKey::MLDSA65` is the only form that appears on the wire (in transactions and actions) and the only form against which a signature can be verified. It is never written into the trie.

### On-trie storage: `PublicKeyHandle` and hashing

Storing a 1952-byte public key for every access key would be prohibitively expensive in state. Instead, ML-DSA-65 access keys are stored **by hash**. To make "a full key on the wire" and "a hashed key in the trie" distinct at the type level, the on-trie identifier lives in a separate enum, `PublicKeyHandle`, used by the trie-key layer and view-API responses:

| Variant | Borsh tag | Content |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ED25519 | 0 | 32-byte raw key (byte-identical to `PublicKey::ED25519`) |
| SECP256K1 | 1 | 64-byte raw key (byte-identical to `PublicKey::SECP256K1`) |
| ML-DSA-65 | 3 | 32-byte SHA3-256 digest of the public key |

> The two enums use deliberately disjoint borsh tag spaces. `PublicKey` owns `{0, 1, 2}`; `PublicKeyHandle` owns `{0, 1, 3}`. Tag 2 (the full ML-DSA-65 key) is rejected by `PublicKeyHandle` decoding, and tag 3 (the hash) never appears on the wire. As a result, "a full ML-DSA-65 key in the trie" and "an ML-DSA-65 hash in a transaction" are both unrepresentable.

Reviewer 3: I like the intentional thought to keep the borsh tag space for handles vs keys separate. Is it possible to "reserve" the tag 3 in `PublicKey` so that no future variant will accidentally take it? I.e. if `PublicKey` encounters a tag of 3 it should raise an error in the current and all future versions of the code. Perhaps this is already the case, but in case it is not I thought I would bring it up explicitly.

Author: I will look up, how can we enforce this at the code level.

Author: Done in https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/16043

The choice of 256 bits has history worth recording. An earlier iteration used SHA3-384, on the argument that matching ML-DSA-65's Category-3 keypair strength against a Grover second-preimage would want a 384-bit digest. The implementation later moved to SHA3-256 (PR [#15830](https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/15830)). The decisive practical property is that a 32-byte digest is short enough to be encoded into a NEAR account id, which keeps the door open to deriving ML-DSA-65 implicit accounts from the account id alone in the future. The research review settled on 256-bit as acceptable for this use (and explicitly rejected anything shorter, such as truncation to 160 bits).

### Verification-cost denial of service

> Verification time does not depend on signature content (see [Verification cost is bounded](#verification-cost-is-bounded)), so a misbehaving signer cannot inflate it. The per-signature charge prices the mean cost difference over the classical schemes with headroom, and a transaction carries at most two ML-DSA-65 signatures (the outer signer plus one inner `DelegateAction` signer), so the aggregate verification cost of any single transaction is bounded and paid for.

Reviewer: Please delete the sentence  "the misbehaving signer cannot inflate it". Again you did not bench for malicious signers providing invalid signatures, you only benched valid (honestly generated) signatrues

Author: The benchmarks in fact did include invalid signatures. But you are right that it doesn't prove that the verification time cannot be inflated. I have changed the wording not to mislead the reader, also mentioning the caveat of rejecting invalid transactions during pre-inclusion validation stage.
